# CrossTab Property

Applies to:{.prefix}

→[##.##.Query]{.info}

The CrossTab property specifies whether or not the result of a two-level grouped query should be in
the form of a cross tabulation. The default value is 0, which indicates that it should be treated
normally, and not as a cross tabulation. Otherwise it is 1, which indicates that the first
grouping specifies the vertical axis and the second grouping specifies the horizontal axis.

The CrossTab property only has effect when exactly two groups are specified.

The Select property of a crosstab query must be made up of one or more aggregate expressions. The
most common applicable aggregate functions are →[*.count], →[*.sum], →[*.percentDown],
→[*.percentAcross] and →[*.percentOverall].

Hybrid functions applied on top of an aggregate expression will work, but the results are probably
not useful as they are always applied to the overall crosstab, and not down the columns or across
the rows. For example, a running sum will be computed over the entire crosstab, in row major order.

The column names for all but the vertical axis in the query result are generated by the system.
Column names are drawn from the values in the column defining the horizontal axis if the
horizontal axis is defined by a character column, and the unique values in the column are valid
FlipDB column names, and only one aggregate measure is defined (one item in the Select property).
In all other cases, column names for all but the vertical axis are specified as C001, C002, etc.

However, fully descriptive names are generated and specified as the DisplayName for each column.
The DisplayName is used when viewing the result in the GUI, and when the result is embedded in a report.

